Learning Objectives
-----------------------------------
By the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

    Explain the similarities and differences between pandas DataFrames and SQL tables
    Translate common pandas operations into SQL equivalents (and vice versa)
    Use pandas' read_sql() to pull database data directly into a DataFrame
    Decide when to use pandas vs. SQL for a given data task

In Module 2, you became comfortable with pandas: loading CSVs, filtering with boolean masks, grouping with groupby(), and sorting with sort_values(). Now you've learned SQL: filtering with WHERE, grouping with GROUP BY, sorting with ORDER BY.

You might be wondering: why do I need both? They seem to do the same things.

They do overlap — and that's exactly the point of this lesson. Understanding the parallels helps you choose the right tool for the job and makes both skills stronger. When you see a SQL query, you'll think "oh, that's like a pandas filter." When you need to wrangle data in pandas, you might realize the problem would be easier to solve with a SQL query first.

Here's the quick translation table:

pandas
	1.df[['name', 'price']]
    2.df[df['price'] > 20]
    3.df.sort_values('price')
    4.df.head(10)
    5.df.groupby('category').mean()
    6.df.merge(other_df, on='key')
    7.df['price'].sum()
    8.len(df) or df.shape[0]
SQL
	1.SELECT name, price FROM products
    2.WHERE price > 20
    3.ORDER BY price
    4.LIMIT 10
    5.GROUP BY category or AVG()
    6.JOIN...ON
    7.SUM(price)
    8.COUNT(*)
What It Does
    1.Pick specific columns
    2.Filter rows
    3.Sort rows
    4.Limit results
    5.Group and aggregate
    6.Combine tables
    7.Aggregate function
    8.Count rows


When to Use Which
-----------------------------------
Use SQL when:

    Your data is already in a database
    You need to filter a huge dataset down to a manageable size before loading it into Python
    You need to join multiple tables
    Multiple applications or users need to query the same data
    You need the data to persist reliably

Use pandas when:

    You're doing exploratory analysis on a CSV or downloaded dataset
    You need complex transformations (reshaping, pivoting, custom functions)
    You're preparing data for visualization
    You're doing one-off analysis that doesn't need to be saved to a database
    You want to prototype quickly before writing the SQL version

Use both together when:

    You query the database with SQL to get the data you need (filtered, joined, aggregated)
    Then load the results into a pandas DataFrame for further analysis or visualization

That "both together" approach is extremely common in professional data work. SQL handles the heavy lifting in the database, and pandas handles the in-memory analysis and visualization.